---
layout: post
date: '2018-06-10'
title: random()
---

# rand5()

Developer An wants to get a random integer from the range of `$[1, 5]$`. Here comes
one of the most common mistakes in the history of programming:

```c
random_number = random() % 5 + 1;
```

The problem is that: In most programming languages (such as C), the `random()` 
function will return a random number from the range `$ [0, RAND\_MAX) $`. Unless 
5 divides `RAND_MAX`, the outcomes are not equally distributed.

Why's that the case? For the sake of simplicity, let's just assume that `RAND_MAX` 
is 7, which implies the `random()` function will return 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 
each with a probability of `$ \frac{1}{7} $`. 

Thus, one can obtain the table:

| `random_number` | required outcomes of `random()` | probability |
|-----------------|---------------------------------|-------------|
|               1 |                            0, 6 | 2/7         |
|               2 |                            1, 5 | 2/7         |
|               3 |                               2 | 1/7         |
|               4 |                               3 | 1/7         |
|               5 |                               4 | 1/7         |

So how do we guarantee the desired probability distribution? Well, the solution 
is fairly simple: While the outcome of `random()` is greater than or equal to 5, 
just sample it again.

```c
int rand5() {
    int x;
    do {
        x = rand();
    } while(x >= 5);
    
    return x + 1;
}
```

Let's see what the probability of having `1` as the outcome of `rand5()` is.

Defines `$ E_n $` to be the event of getting a `1` after `$ n $` samples of `random()` 
without breaking the loop. Our desired event `$ rand5() = 1 $`, `$ E $`, can be broken down into the following mutually exclusive events:

- Event `$ E_1 $`: We get `1` after 1 sample. This event is equivalent to the event 
of `$ rand() = 0 $` at the first sample. Thus, `$ P(E_1) = \frac{1}{7} $`. 

- Event `$E_2$`: We get `1` after 2 samples without breaking the inner loop. This 
event is equivalent to the event of having a resample in the first time (ie. 
`$ rand() \in \{5, 6\} $` at the first sample), and `$rand() = 0$` at the second
sample. The probability is `$ \frac{2}{7} \cdot \frac{1}{7}$ `.

- The event `$ E_n $` of getting a `1` after n samples, without breaking the inner loop,
will have the probability of `$ {\frac{2}{7}}^{n-1} \cdot \frac{1}{7} $`.

Since all the above events are mutually exclusive, it holds that:

`$$ P(E) = \sum _n^{\infty} P(E_i) = P(E_1) + P(E_2) + P(E_3) + ... P(E_n) + ... $$`

`$$
= \frac{1}{7} + \frac{1}{7} \cdot \frac{2}{7} 
  + \frac{1}{7} \cdot {\frac{2}{7}}^{2} 
  + \frac{1}{7} \cdot {\frac{2}{7}}^{3} 
  + ... \frac{1}{7} \cdot {\frac{2}{7}}^{n-1} + ...
$$`

`$$
= \frac{1}{7} \cdot (1 + \frac{2}{7} + {\frac{2}{7}}^2 + {\frac{2}{7}}^3 + ...)
= \frac{1}{7} \cdot \frac{1}{1 - \frac{2}{7}}
= \frac{1}{7} \cdot \frac{7}{5}
= \frac{1}{5}
$$`

We can apply the above methodology to prove `$ P(rand5() = x) = 1/5 $`
for any `$ x \in \{2, 3, 4, 5\} $`.

# rand7()

Given that we have a function `rand5()` that will return an integer from the range
`$ [0, 4] $` with equal probability. Based on this function, how can one construct
a function `rand7()` that will return an integer from the range `$ [1, 7] $` with 
equal probability?

Here's my approach:

```c
int rand7() {
    int d1, d2, x;
    do {
        d1 = rand5();
        d2 = rand5();
        x = 5 * d1 + d2;
    } while(x >= 21);
    
    return x % 7 + 1;
}
```

Our very goal is to have the integer `x` to be equally distributed over the 
smallest range posible that is greater than `$ [0, 6] $`, than we can "cut" it out 
and re-map that range into the desired range. A conventional choice is to choose
the range `$ [0, 24] $`, as one can easily sample all possible 5-ary 2-digits 
numbers with equal probability by using only two `rand5()` function calls.

Note that we can map the range `$ [0, 20] $` to `$ [0, 6] $` by the `mod` operator. 
Now we can apply the same trick as before: Since `x` is equally distributed
over `$ [0, 24] $` inside the `do(...) while();` loop, then by the same methodology
above, one can prove that `$ P(rand5() = x) = \frac{1}{7} $` for any `$ x \in \{1, 2, ..., 7\} $`.

